TDC 463
John Kristoff
Routing Worksheet

1. Given an address block of 140.192.0.0/16 to be used as the primary
   address pool for a medium-sized university, devise an addressing and
   routing plan that supports:

     * Two major, but geographically distinct, redundantly interconnected
       campuses each with about 5000 hosts spread across multiple
       buildings at each campus.

     * Five smaller satellite campuses, each with less than 1000 hosts.

     * Two primary "data centers" that house a variety of central
       services such as web servers, email servers and file servers.
       Don't forget access control policies.

     * External connectivity to the Internet through 2 separate locations,
       with different ISPs at each location.  One location could be marked
       as the primary exit/entry if you so desire.

2. Two large ISPS have equipment at common national "exchanges" in
   the U.S.  They are roughly equal in size and would be competitors.
   However, One ISP has a lot of "eyeball" customers on the East coast,
   that is, end users on cable modems or DSL links.  The other has a
   large eyeball market on the West coast.  Neither have a dominant
   position in the "content" market, that is the stuff the eyeball
   customers tend to access such as web content, multimedia services
   or game servers.  They are deciding whether to "peer", that is,
   exchange routes and traffic with each other.  Discuss why this may
   be useful, not useful and what strategies either ISP may want to
   embark on to obtain a competitive advantage over the other.

3. A financial services company has been allocated an IPv4 /22 prefix
   by it's sole upstream ISP out of the ISP's larger allocation.  One
   day it is discovered that some other ISP, in another country, begins
   announcing the four more specific /24's from that /22, causing
   major problems for the financial services company.  Discuss what
   happens when this occurs, what can be done about it in the short
   term and what can be done about it in the long term.

4. An international mobile phone operator is anticipating a marked
   rise in Internet-capable devices to a growing consumer market.  It
   would like to have a large number of public IP addresses for this
   new service offering and the anticipated growth.  However, with the
   free pool IPv4 addresses practically exhausted, they are
   contemplating how they can best role out this new service at a
   reasonable cost and minimal complexity.  Discuss the challenges and
   potential solutions to deploying a large number of new, public end
   systems in a scenario such as this.

5. You run a large state-wide network that supports government and
   public institutions (e.g. museums, schools, libraries).  There are
   dozens of routers dispersed throughout the state with little to
   no "remote hands" service in case of disruption other than being
   able to walk a local site contact through the most basic of tasks
   such as rebooting a system or being your local eyes and hands to
   do basic troubleshooting.  There are multiple connections from some
   of the larger sites to external ISP networks for connectivity.
   Discuss the likely physical connectivity of such a network as well
   as the routing strategy.  What routing protocol(s) might be used
   or not, and how.  Also consider a proposal whereby at each site
   where external connectivity comes in, the site router will
   "re-advertise" BGP routes from the ISP to the internal network.
   What would that look like?  How would it work?  What it work?

6. You are a DNS services provider, prepared to go head-to-head with
   the likes of OpenDNS and Google DNS.  You have a limited, but pretty
   substantial budget to get the deployment started.  Eventually you
   would like to offer DNS service around the globe.  Detail how you
   might go about rolling out this service considering network design,
   cost considerations and performance goals (hint: low latency, local
   access to your DNS infrastructure is key).

7. A remote, otherwise anonymous small to medium network has been
   announcing prefixes which were not originally assigned to it.  Some
   prefixes have been unused in the public Internet for a long time.
   Other times some prefixes the network has originated have been
   claimed by the network to be "leaks" as a result of customers or
   "legacy" configurations of re-using public address space.  They
   usually have them stop after some time has passed and complaints
   have been lodged, but their continued behavior is worrying suspect.
   What do you do?  What can you do if anything?

8. You are an .edu and you have two significant BGP peers.  One is a
   commercial (aka commodity) ISP that provides reachability to what
   is essentially the entire Internet.  It is a good ISP, but they
   are expensive and using them cost money.  The other peer is to a
   research network, which has an incredibly high-speed backbone and
   those participating on that research network are very well
   connected and have low latency between each other.  You obtain
   funding on a yearly basis from various research grants and are
   expected to maintain this connection.  The good news is that the
   R&E capacity is seemingly unlimited and costs are stable and
   manageable.  The bad news is that only R&E institutions are on
   this network, which is about 10%-20% of your traffic, but which
   isn't bad.  How do you make use of the R&E network as much as
   possible?  How might you continue to design your network to offload
   traffic from the expensive commodity network?

$Id: routing-worksheet.txt,v 1.1 2016/10/10 15:22:42 jtk Exp $
